Update plugin guide - Closes #1105 (#1107)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/guides/app-development/plugin.adoc

:url_rpc_endpoints: rpc-endpoints.adoc
:url_tutorials_hello: tutorials/hello-world.adoc

How to create a new plugin for a blockchain application.

.Prerequisites
[NOTE]
====
To use this guide, it is assumed that the following criteria have been met:

* Lisk Commander is installed, and a basic blockchain application is already initialized, as explained in the guide xref:{url_guides_setup}[].
====

== Generating the plugin skeleton

Use Lisk Commander to generate the skeleton for the new asset:

[source,bash]
----
$ lisk generate:plugin --help
Creates custom plugin.

USAGE
  $ lisk generate:plugin ALIAS

ARGUMENTS
  ALIAS  Alias of the plugin.

OPTIONS
  -o, --output=output      Path to create the plugin.
  -t, --template=template  Template to bootstrap the application. It will read from `.liskrc.json` or use `lisk-ts` if not found.
  --registry=registry      URL of a registry to download dependencies from.
  --standalone             Create a standalone plugin package.

EXAMPLES
  generate:plugin my-plugin
  generate:plugin my-plugin --standalone --output ./myplugin
----

The command `generate:asset` expects 1 argument:

* Plugin alias: The name of the plugin.

> Needs to be a string that only consists of small and capital letters [a-z,A-Z].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Needs to be a string that only consists of both lower case and upper case letters [a-z, A-Z].
```

> No numbers, hyphen, etc allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No numbers, hyphens, etc., are allowed.
```

[[generate-plugin]]
[source,bash]
----
lisk generate:plugin nftApi
----

This will generate the following files:

----
Using template "lisk-ts"
Generating plugin skeleton
Registering plugin...
identical .liskrc.json
   create src/app/plugins/nft_api/nft_api_plugin.ts
   create test/unit/plugins/nft_api/nft_api_plugin.spec.ts

> No change to package.json was detected. No package manager install will be executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No change to package.json was detected. No package manager installation will be executed.
```

Finished creating plugin
----

> It will also automatically register the plugin with the application, by adding it to `src/app/plugins.ts`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It will also automatically register the plugin with the application by adding it to `src/app/plugins.ts`.
```

.src/app/plugins.ts
[source,typescript]
----
/* eslint-disable @typescript-eslint/no-empty-function */
import { Application } from 'lisk-sdk';
import { NftApiPlugin } from "./plugins/nft_api/nft_api_plugin";

// @ts-expect-error Unused variable error happens here until at least one module is registered
export const registerPlugins = (app: Application): void => {

    app.registerPlugin(NftApiPlugin);
};
----

The file `nft_api_plugin.ts` contains the plugin skeleton and the file `nft_api_plugin.spec.ts` contains the related unit tests for the new plugin.

> Take a look at the plugin skeleton in `nft_api_plugin.ts`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin skeleton can be viewed in `nft_api_plugin.ts`:
```

import type { BaseChannel, EventsDefinition, ActionsDefinition, SchemaWithDefault } from 'lisk-sdk';

 /* eslint-disable class-methods-use-this */
 /* eslint-disable  @typescript-eslint/no-empty-function */
 export class NftApiPlugin extends BasePlugin {
	// private _channel!: BaseChannel;

	public static get alias(): string {
		return 'nftApi';
	}

	// eslint-disable-next-line @typescript-eslint/class-literal-property-style
	public static get info(): PluginInfo {
		return {
			author: 'mona',
			version: '0.1.0',
			name: 'nftApi',
		};
	}

	// eslint-disable-next-line @typescript-eslint/explicit-member-accessibility
	public get defaults(): SchemaWithDefault {
		return {
			$id: '/plugins/plugin-nftApi/config',
			type: 'object',
			properties: {},
			required: [],
			default: {},
		}
	}

	public get events(): EventsDefinition {
		return [
			// 'block:created',
			// 'block:missed'
		];
	}

	public get actions(): ActionsDefinition {
		return {
		// 	hello: async () => { hello: 'world' },
		};
	}

		public async load(_: BaseChannel): Promise<void> {
		// this._channel = channel;
		// this._channel.once('app:ready', () => {});
	}

	public async unload(): Promise<void> {}
}
----

> The command `generate:plugin` already created the plugin `NftApiPlugin` which contains already skeletons of all important components of a plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The command `generate:plugin` already created the plugin `NftApiPlugin` which contains skeletons of all the important components of a plugin.
```

> The only properties which are set at the moment are the auto-generated plugin info, and the plugin alias which we defined when generating the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only properties currently set at this point are the auto-generated plugin info, and the plugin alias which was defined when generating the plugin.
```

> The plugin can already be used like this with the application, but it isn't doing anything yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin can already be used like this with the application, however, it is not performing any functions yet.
```

> To give the plugin a purpose, it is needed to implement certain logic inside of the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give the plugin a purpose, it is necessary to implement certain logic inside of the plugin.
```

[source,typescript]
----
public get actions(): ActionsDefinition {
    return {
    // 	hello: async () => { hello: 'world' },
    };
}
----

In this example, two actions are added:

* If `getKnownTimestamp` is invoked, it returns the list of timestamps of the blocks that were added to the chain, while the plugin was active.
* If `getLatestDelegate` is invoked, it returns the last delegate name that was registered in the network.

[source,typescript]
----
public get actions(): ActionsDefinition {
    return {
      getKnownTimestamp: () => this._knownTimestamps,
      getLatestDelegate: () => this._latestDelegate
    };
}
----

== Events

[source,typescript]
----
public get events(): EventsDefinition {
    return [
        'newDelegate',
        'timestamp'
    ];
}
----

In this example, two events are added:

* `newDelegate`, which is published in the `load()` function, when a new delegate is registered in the network.
* `timestamp`, which is published in the `load()` function, when a new block is added to the blockchain.

== Defining the plugin logic

The `load()` function of a plugin contains the plugin logic that is executed when the plugin is loaded in the application.

> It can be used to retrieve, mutate, store and/or publish data in a specific way, depending on the purpose of the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be used to retrieve, mutate, store and/or publish data in a specific manner, depending on the purpose of the plugin.
```

The `unload()` method contains the logic that needs to be executed to unload the plugin correctly.

> It is executed for example on application shutdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, It is executed on application shutdown.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For example, it is executed on application shutdown.
```

[source,typescript]
----
async load(channel) {
  this._api = await apiClient.createIPCClient('~/.lisk/my-app');

  channel.subscribe('app:transaction:new', (data) => {
    const txBuffer = Buffer.from(data.transaction, 'hex');
    const transaction = this._api.transaction.decode(txBuffer);
    if ( transaction.moduleID === 5 && transaction.assetID === 0 ) {
      this._latestDelegate = transaction.username;
      channel.publish('nftApi:newDelegate', {
        name: transaction.username,
      });
    }
  });
  channel.subscribe('app:block:new', ({ data }) => {
    const decodedBlock = this.codec.decodeBlock(data.block);
    this._knownTimestamps.push(decodedBlock.header.timestamp);
    channel.publish('nftApi:timestamp', { timestamp: decodedBlock.header.timestamp });
  });
}

public async unload(): Promise<void> {
  this._latestDelegate = undefined;
  this._knownTimestamps = [];
}
----

== Defining the plugin configuration

A plugin can be configured by setting the related properties in the application configuration.

The `defaults()` getter defines which properties are available in the xref:{url_architecture}[application configuration] for the plugin.

> The below config options are not really required in this example, but they give a good example of how a configuration of a plugin could be structured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The config options shown below are not really required in this example, however, they provide a good example of how to structure the configuration of a plugin.
```
